Welcome to Anatomical terminology.
A twenty-two-year-old medical student walks into the emergency department.
They have pain in the front of their lower arm.
The orthopaedic resident asks a series of quick questions.
Is it on the anterior or posterior aspect?
Is it medial or lateral?
Is it proximal to the wrist,
or distal to the elbow?
The student freezes.
Not because the injury is serious,
but because they do not yet share the resident's language.
In one week, that language will be yours.
Anatomical terminology is not jargon.
It is precision.
It removes ambiguity from clinical practice,
from surgery, and from research.
When a surgeon in one country describes a finding,
a colleague anywhere in the world understands exactly what they mean.
That shared language connects every doctor,
every researcher, and every operating room on the planet.
This week, you begin to build yours.
Every directional term in anatomy is defined relative to one standard starting point:
the anatomical position.
In the anatomical position, the body is standing
upright, facing forward.
The feet are at shoulder width,
with toes pointing forward.
The arms hang at the sides,
with the palms facing forward, not inward.
That detail about the palms is easy to get wrong,
so take a moment to lock it in.
Why does this matter?
Because the same body part can look very different depending on how a person is positioned.
They might be lying in bed,
sitting in a chair, or placed upside down inside a scanner.
By always referring back to the anatomical position,
every anatomist in the world works from the same reference,
regardless of how the patient is actually lying or sitting.
Think of it like a compass.
No matter which direction you face,
north is always north.
The anatomical position is anatomy's north.
Two resting positions you will encounter on the wards.
Prone means lying face-down.
Supine means lying face-up.
A quick memory hook: prone is like a prone shooter,
face toward the ground;
supine is like sunbathing, face toward the sky.
Imagine slicing a loaf of bread.
Depending on which way you cut,
you get a completely different view of the inside.
Body planes work the same way.
They are imaginary flat surfaces that divide the body,
letting us describe location and orientation precisely.
There are three primary planes to know.
The first is the sagittal plane,
which divides the body into right and left portions.
When it runs exactly down the midline,
it is called the midsagittal plane,
also known as the median plane.
When it sits slightly off-centre,
it becomes a parasagittal plane.
Think of slicing a burger straight down the middle from top to bottom.
The second is the coronal plane,
also called the frontal plane.
It divides the body into the anterior portion,
meaning the front, and the posterior portion,
meaning the back.
The name comes from the Latin word for crown.
Picture a crown on your head,
and the plane passing through it runs front to back.
The third is the transverse plane,
also called the axial or horizontal plane.
It divides the body into the superior portion,
meaning the upper part, and the inferior portion,
meaning the lower part.
Computed tomography scans produce images in the transverse plane.
That is why the images look like horizontal slices of the body when viewed
on a screen.
Directional terms describe where one structure sits relative to another.
All of them assume the body is in anatomical position,
standing upright and facing forward.
The first pair is superior and inferior.
Superior means above, or toward the head.
Inferior means below, or toward the feet.
The heart, for example, is superior to the stomach.
Next, anterior and posterior.
Anterior means toward the front of the body,
and it is also called ventral.
Posterior means toward the back,
and it is also called dorsal.
The sternum is anterior to the heart.
Then medial and lateral.
Medial means toward the midline of the body.
Lateral means away from the midline.
The thumb is lateral to the little finger.
Proximal and distal apply specifically to the limbs.
Proximal means closer to where the limb attaches to the trunk.
Distal means farther from that attachment point.
The elbow is proximal to the wrist,
while the wrist is distal to the elbow.
A quick way to remember: proximal suggests proximity to the trunk,
and distal suggests distance from it.
Finally, superficial and deep.
Superficial means closer to the body surface.
Deep means farther from the surface.
Skin is superficial to the muscles,
and bones are deep to the muscles.
Now that you know the body's planes,
you can describe how joints move.
Each movement happens within a specific plane.
Flexion means decreasing the angle between two body
parts, like bending.
Extension means increasing that angle, like straightening.
Both occur in the sagittal plane.
Bending your elbow is flexion.
Straightening it again is extension.
Abduction means moving a limb away from the body's midline.
Adduction means moving it back toward the midline.
Both occur in the coronal,
or frontal, plane.
A memory aid: abduction takes you absent from the midline,
and adduction adds you back.
Rotation means turning around a long axis.
Medial rotation turns toward the midline;
lateral rotation turns away.
This occurs in the transverse plane.
The forearm has two special movements.
Pronation rotates the forearm so the palm faces downward.
Supination rotates it so the palm faces upward.
Think of supination as the position for holding a bowl of soup.
The ankle adds four more.
Dorsiflexion pulls the foot upward,
toward the shin.
Plantar flexion points it downward,
like a ballet dancer pointing toes.
Inversion turns the sole inward,
toward the midline.
Eversion turns it outward, away from it.
Finally, circumduction combines all four movements in sequence: flexion,
extension, abduction, and adduction.
Together they produce a cone-shaped range of motion,
best seen at the shoulder joint.
Bone is remarkable because it is both hard and flexible at the same time.
That balance comes from two components working together.
The first is the organic component,
making up about thirty-five percent of bone's dry weight.
This is primarily collagen, a protein that gives bone its flexibility and tensile strength.
Collagen is produced by osteoblasts,
the bone-forming cells.
Without collagen, bone would shatter on impact,
the way glass does.
The second component is inorganic,
making up the remaining sixty-five percent.
This is primarily hydroxyapatite, a crystalline calcium-phosphate mineral.
Hydroxyapatite provides hardness and compressive strength.
Without it, bone would bend like rubber.
Think of it like reinforced concrete.
Collagen plays the role of steel
rebar, providing flexibility.
Hydroxyapatite plays the role of the concrete, providing hardness.
Neither works alone.
Together, they create a material that is both strong and resilient.
This matters beyond anatomy.
If you are studying calcium homeostasis in biochemistry this week,
the same calcium ions that build hydroxyapatite in bone are regulated by parathyroid
hormone and calcitonin.
When you encounter those pathways,
connect them back here.
Inside the hollow spaces of bone lives a specialised tissue called bone marrow.
There are two distinct types,
and each has a very different job.
Red bone marrow is found within the spaces of spongy,
or cancellous, bone.
In adults, it sits mainly in flat bones like the sternum and the ilium,
and in the rounded ends of long bones.
This is where haematopoiesis takes place.
Haematopoiesis is the production of all blood cells,
including red cells, white cells, and platelets.
Clinically, this matters because a bone marrow biopsy,
taken from the posterior iliac crest,
is the standard way to diagnose leukaemia,
anaemia, and other blood disorders.
Yellow bone marrow occupies the medullary cavity,
the hollow shaft running through the centre of long bones.
It consists mainly of adipocytes,
which are fat cells, and functions as a reserve of stored energy.
What makes yellow marrow remarkable is its adaptability.
In severe blood loss or anaemia,
yellow marrow can convert back into red marrow and resume producing blood cells on demand.
Think of the medullary cavity as a fuel storage tank,
and the spongy regions as the production floor where blood cells are made.
To remember this: red marrow produces red blood cells,
and yellow marrow stores yellow fat.
A radiologist sends a report.
It describes a tumour in the medial aspect of the right thigh,
proximal to the knee.
Where exactly is this tumour?
Option A says it is on the outer side of the thigh,
near the knee.
Option B says it is on the inner side of the thigh,
near the hip.
Option C says it is on the inner side of the thigh,
near the knee.
And Option D says it is on the outer side of the thigh,
near the hip.
Work through the two terms.
Medial means toward the midline of the body.
That places the tumour on the inner side of the thigh.
Proximal means closer to the root of the limb than the reference point.
Proximal to the knee means in the thigh,
close to the knee.
The correct answer is C.
The tumour is on the inner side of the thigh,
near the knee.
Medial gives the side, and proximal to the knee gives the level.
Here is a question to check your understanding of anatomical planes.
A computed tomography scan of the abdomen is taken in the transverse plane.
Each scan produces a series of image slices through the body.
Based on what you know about the transverse plane,
consider this question carefully.
Which of the following best describes how each slice divides the body?
Does it divide the body into right and left halves?
Does it divide the body into front and back halves?
Does it divide the body into upper and lower halves?
Or does each slice represent a diagonal section through the body?
Take a moment before moving on.
Think about what you know about the three main anatomical planes.
The transverse plane, the coronal plane,
and the sagittal plane each divide the body in a distinct direction.
When you have your answer,
move to the next slide to find out how you did.
Here is a scenario to test what you have learned about bone composition.
A child presents with bones that fracture easily,
even though calcium levels are completely normal.
Investigations reveal that the child has vitamin C deficiency,
the condition known as scurvy.
The question is: which component of bone is primarily affected in this case?
The first option is hydroxyapatite,
the mineral salt that gives bone its hardness and compressive strength.
The second option is collagen,
the organic matrix that provides flexibility and tensile strength.
The third option is yellow bone marrow,
found within the shafts of long bones.
And the fourth option is haematopoietic stem cells,
which produce blood cells within the red marrow.
Pause here, think about the role of vitamin C in bone structure,
and then select your answer.
Here is a question to test your recall.
A patient is diagnosed with severe aplastic anaemia.
Which marrow conversion would you expect to occur?
Option A states that red marrow converts to yellow marrow in flat bones.
In aplastic anaemia, the body needs more blood cell
production, not less.
This conversion would move in the wrong direction entirely.
Option B states that yellow marrow converts back to red marrow in the long bones.
Hold that thought.
Option C says haematopoiesis moves to the liver only.
Extramedullary haematopoiesis can occur, but it is not confined to the liver alone,
and this option does not describe a marrow conversion.
Option D suggests the medullary cavity fills with spongy bone.
That is not a response seen in aplastic anaemia.
The correct answer is B.
In aplastic anaemia, the body faces severe haematopoietic stress.
Yellow marrow, which is normally inactive adipose tissue,
converts back into red marrow.
This process is called marrow reconversion.
It recruits the long bones back into active blood cell production when the body's demand
exceeds the normal marrow output.
This is a key compensatory response worth remembering.
Key takeaways: Anatomical position: body upright,
palms forward — the universal reference point for all anatomical descriptions Three body
planes: Sagittal (right/left), Coronal/Frontal (front/back),
Transverse (up/down) — remember SCT Directional pairs: Superior/Inferior,
Anterior/Posterior, Medial/Lateral, Proximal/Distal, Superficial/Deep